[MUSIC]
>> Ben Callahan: So
now let's talk about media queries.
Once we have our content and
our design sort of your responding.
As soon as we find a place where
those are no longer in harmony,
that's when we need to start thinking
about larger adjustments to our layout.
And we can do that with media queries.
So here's a few examples of media queries.
These top two are what you might
find in the head of a document, so
literally a link to a stylesheet.
And the bottom two are using the media
keyword inside of an actual style sheet,
so literally right in line
with your other styles.
The first one, I'm not suggesting
that you use all these together,
these are just four different examples.
The first one we're saying we
wanna link to a style sheet, and
you'd have a rel style and
a reference to the actual CSS file.
But we only want those styles to apply
when the width of the viewport is 30 ems,
minimum of 30 ems so
30 ems or greater, okay.
And then here we're saying screen end, so
we're combining a media type with a media
feature and if it's screen and
the minimum width is 30ems.
Down below inside of your CSS file itself,
you could put a block of styles,
literally nesting styles right
inside these curly brackets, right.
And these styles would only apply
if the minimal width is 30ems and
the same kind of thing right
there with the screen end.
Let's break this down a little bit.
So media types.
Something that you guys are probably
familiar with if you've ever done a print
stylesheet, nright.
Media print like the bottom
there in the link.
And you can link to a print CSS or
whatever you would call it.
That's media type,
been around for a long time.
And there's a ton of media types that
most people don't really use for much.
Let's take a look at
a couple of those quickly.
So all is a media type,
which literally just means all.
And if you don't specify a type according
to the spec, all is the default.
[COUGH] Braille, embossed,
speech handheld, projection,
screen, tv print tty.
I mean all these are out there.
Go take a look at the spec if you're
curious about what all these do,
the ones that generally we use the most
at this point are screen and print.
I've got a lot more I could say about
media types, and catch me on break if you
wanna talk in more detail here.
>> Speaker 2: Do some of those overlap,
like handheld and screen?
>> Ben Callahan: No, sometimes when you
just look at the list, that would make
sense, but according to the spec.
It's mutually exclusive.
You can only be one media type.
This has actually created
a lot of problems, and
we'll talk a little bit about that here.
So let's look at the other side
of a query, the media feature.
This is,
when most people talk about media queries,
this is kind of what
they're talking about.
You can see the min-width,
the max-width, orientation, color,
generally their named value pairs or
just the name as in the case of color.
So a named value pair would be the minimum
width name 30 ems is the value.
And most of the media features
except a min and the max prefix.
Except in cases where it doesn't
really make sense like orientation,
min orientation doesn't
really make a lot of sense.
But you know min-width.
You could also just say width.
You could say width, 100 pixels or
width, whatever, any unit that you want.
But that's only gonna apply styles
when the viewport is exactly 100
pixels, you know?
So there's not a lot of use for that.
So these are just a few examples.
Here's a list of all the others and
there's many more coming.
Width, height, device-width,
device- height, orientation, aspect-ratio.
I mean, you get the idea.
There's a ton of these things.
Okay, again.
Go read the spec.
This is not a complex
specification to read.
It's actually very simple.
There's a ton of really good examples.
We really use width pretty much that's
what we most people are doing these days.
If you look at Apple's home page, they've
started experimenting kind of in some cool
ways with the height media feature.
It's really kind of neat,
some of the things they're doing.
Orientation lets you sort of
determine portrait versus landscape.
It's more helpful if you're
using orientation to use
it in combination with device width and
device height.
Let's talk a little bit about the
difference between width and device width.
So, this laptop that I'm
presenting on is a device and
it has a resolution that it can support.
It also has a browser that has a viewport
width which doesn't have to necessarily
be the same width as
the display of my device.
On something like an iOS device however,
the browser is pretty much
always full screen, right.
And so there's a little bit of confusion
about what these actually mean.
But with is viewport width.
So if you adjust your browser width,
that's gonna change the width attribute or
the width feature.
If you were on an iPhone versus an iPad,
those have different device widths,
make sense?
Now, you should know too that an iPhone
is gonna report a device width of
320 pixels whether it's portrait or
landscape, okay.
Cuz the device width in its
standard orientation is 320 pixels.
So that is kind of a quick summary.
We don't generally use device width and
device-height because really what
that's doing is sort of tying us down
to specific resolutions of hardware.
And that's kind of the problem
that we're trying to get out of.
This mentality of fixed width.
What you might end up doing is building
a bunch of sites that work for
very specific devices and
then something else comes out and
like say the iPhone 5
with a taller screen.
So now, how do you adjust and you don't
wanna leave weird layout issues there.
So if we use percentages and we use media
queries with a width, instead of a device
width, we can actually get stuff that
works well in between those gaps as well.
All right, so let's take a look at some
of these questions on media queries.
We're gonna talk in more detail here so
>> Speaker 2: I'm guessing the color was
just like color versus black and white.
>> Ben Callahan: You can give it,
there's several color features.
There is a something about black and
white, grayscale.
There's also a number of colors supported,
that kind of thing, so.
Let's see here.
So we're looking here at two
different media queries.
Again, I'm not suggesting
you'd use these together.
These would be literally right
in your actual stylesheet.
So in this case,
I'm saying a min width of 600 pixels.
Styles for 600 pixels and
greater would go inside that block.
Max width 38 ems and down,
styles would go inside that block.
And there's,
in a really simple way to consider it,
there's sort of two ways to approach
writing your queries, okay.
Large resolution first and
small resolution first.
Generally what happens is, if you just
take a really simple example here.
If you have got a site already
that's designed at say 960 or
1000 pixels and you wanna start to adjust
that site for smaller resolutions.
You might leave your existing stylesheets
with all the large resolution layouts.
Styles at the top, and then at
the bottom of that same style sheet,
apply some max width queries,
which indicate 62 ems and lower.
So as the browser, or
as the viewport shrinks,
you'll start to trigger these
media queries below, okay.
And what you would end up doing
in this style block is you'd
be putting a bunch of
styles that are undoing
some of the more complex layout that
you've done at a higher resolution, okay.
So we call this subtractive CSS and
this is pretty, pretty, pretty common.
A lot of people are doing things this way.
In fact I think even in Ethan's book,
he kind of talks about this,
as a starting point.
And small resolution first is
the exact opposite of that.
So you would start your CSS
file with the smallest layout.
You're trying to build for between 0
pixels and whatever you think is a,
whoever that layout starts to break down,
you know.
And so then you would use min-width
instead of max-width queries at
the bottom of those styles,
and apply styles for and
these trigger as the view
port increases in width.
One thing that's important to note is
that styles here, 28 ems and greater, so
all of these styles have been applied.
And now these are going to
be added on top of those.
And 53 ems is greater than 28 ems.
Right, so this style block would be
applied and this would be applied.
And the same thing in
the large resolution first,
those are all gonna apply and
just continue to stack on.
We call this additive CSS because you're
starting with the simple and adding to it.
You end up with smaller
stylesheets generally
if you take this approach because you're
not defining a bunch of styles and
then having to undo all those definitions.
This is a little bit more.
It's a little harder to get started with
this but once you've kind of adjusted your
workflow to adapt to this,
it makes a lot more sense.
We do all of ours with this format now.
Let's talk a little bit about pros and
cons here.
So larger as first you get by default,
you kind of get easy support for
older versions of IE.
The nice thing about CSS is if a browser
or a user agent doesn't understand what
you're trying to do,
it's just gonna ignore those styles, okay?
I mean if you don't get errors oouts,
it doesn't error out, it just ignores it.
So however,
old IE is not gonna support media queries.
So IE 8 and older.
What that means is, if you start,
if we take a look at that
small resolution first.
If I define all of my simplest layout,
or say it's just a linear
one column layout at small resolutions,
in IE, that doesn't support media queries,
it's gonna ignore this and this, it's
gonna ignore everything else in the file.
So desktop resolution browser,
older IE RE is gonna get of
a single column very simple layout.
And some people are okay with that.
You know that's a decision you can make,
but I'm gonna show you some ways to kind
of get around that in a little bit here.
If you start with your large rez first and
undo those styles, older IE or
any other user agents that
don't support media queries,
you're gonna get that more complex
layout and then you'll undo it.
So you actually serve them what they would
maybe be expecting to see the largest
resolution layout.
Small Rez First is more logical.
You're kind of building things up
as opposed to tearing them down.
But again support for older IE.
And then small devices
loading all the assets.
This is a little bit tricky.
Most people think that if I
put a media query on a link,
I'm not gonna actually load those
styles or try to render them.
Actually the truth is,
it's gonna make a request.
Even if the media doesn't fit and
if it could never fit.
So you really need to be
careful about those things.
If you do large rez first, a small device
like a phone is gonna load all those
styles, make all the requests
needed in background images and
a URL that's referenced in there.
It's gonna request the stylesheets, it's
gonna do all that work, try to render them
and then undo a lot of that stuff, so the
processing is greater on smaller devices.
[COUGH]
>> Ben Callahan: I get asked a ton like
usually what happens as soon as
you talk about media queries,
somebody says how do I decide
where to put a media query?
What resolution should I put it at?
And there have been people
who've written articles about,
here's a breakdown of using analytics,
figuring out what devices are popular, and
here's what you should set for
your break points.
And I don't really subscribe
to that philosophy at all.
I think that the best way to determine
it is to figure out where the layout and
the content no longer work together.
So start small.
Get your styles working.
Get your layout working.
Get your content into the browser.
Start to adjust, and
as soon as things start to break.
So your line length gets too long, right.
Then you need to start
adding a media query there.
And you need to across the system.
You're not building pages really anymore.
You're building a system
to display content.
So you need to think about it in
the context of multiple templates and
multiple pages, but you're really looking
for places where those break down and
then you can add one of these queries
to actually improve that layout.
This is a tool,
the Media Query Bookmarklet.
If you just Google Media Query Bookmarklet
by one of my devs Rob Tarr.
And it's incredibly useful.
What this will do, and
I'll show you quickly here.
What it'll do is actually indicate what
media queries are being fired, and also
indicate what the width and height of your
view port is as you change the browser.
So it's really helpful in finding
those places where you might need to
add a larger adjustment.
So I'm gonna show you that as we
jump into this next example but
what I'd like to have you guys do is add
a media query into the br-44.html file.
Let's take a quick look here at that.
>> Ben Callahan: So inside that BR 4,
again I just was playing around
with the image styles and
then there's a media query that you should
put, I've put a little comment here for
where I would like you to
put that media query, okay.
And if we open up BR 4, and
I run that bookmark that I
was just telling you about.
It creates this little guy up here, okay.
What this does is it gives you
the current viewport width and
height in both pixels in AMS and
it gives you your cursor position.
And you can adjust.
Oops.
Sorry about that.
You can adjust the width and
you'll see that that adjusts.
So what you might do is start small and
take this up until you feel like it's
appropriate to add a break and
you can look and see.
It's around 600 pixels or
it's around 30 ems.
So this tool just helps you in time to
determine where a good point, where there
is a break in the layout, in the design
and layout and you need to add a query.
So what I like for you guys to do is add a
media query in to be our -4 and to try and
get that image to adjust a little bit
better at certain resolutions, okay.
I'll pull up the slides as well.
So we can see some of that syntax for you.
>> Ben Callahan: So we've kind of defined
our smallest resolution styles already.
So at the bottom of that CSS file,
we're gonna wanna add a min width query
which would apply at a certain
resolution and higher only.
You could choose to use pixels or ems.
>> Speaker 3: So where's
the tool to get the pixel at the top?
>> Ben Callahan: Media query bookmarklet.
You just Google that, you'll find it.
It's out on GitHub,
just drag it to your toolbar there
and,
>> Ben Callahan: He's always updating it
too so
>> Ben Callahan: There's
a handful of other bookmarklets
that do the same kinds of things.
This one's nice because you can move that
little window from left to right if you
need to, if it's covering content.
Kind of makes things nice.
All right, let's jump back in.
>> Ben Callahan: So if we take a look at
br-5, I can show you quickly
what I did as an example.
And then we will play around
a little bit with it here.
Okay, so I chose.
So you can see the styles for
the image here I've left, right.
So the foot right with
the max width of 100%.
And then what I opted to do was look for
a place here where we reached that
resolution, in fact the native resolution
of the image and it started to stop in
the text of floating up to the left
because of it, kind of broke the layout.
And what I chose to do there is set
the width of the image to 60% and
give it a little bit of
a margin on the left.
It's still floated right but
those styles above are still applied.
So we open up a BR-5.
Kind of play around with how this works.
I've also gotten rid of some of
the background colors just to
clean this up a little bit.
But you'll see that works fine here and
then once we reach a point where we reach
the native resolution of that image.
I just quickly add a little margin
to the left of the image and
let the text kind of set
up there next to it.
So very simple, right.
Simple little query, min width 850.
We could set this to happen
sooner if we wanted,
550.
>> Ben Callahan: And
you'll see that it actually just
happens much sooner as soon
as the view-port width itself is 550 or
greater, okay?
Pretty simple, questions on this?
The rest of the day, we're gonna talk
in more detail about all this stuff.